README.md, before:

# FreeDevTool.app

[FreeDevTool.App](https://FreeDevTool.App)

**A comprehensive collection of 49+ open source developer tools with offline functionality**

## Overview

FreeDevTool.App is a comprehensive web-based collection of open source developer and productivity utilities. It provides a wide range of tools across sections like Conversions, Formatters, Encoders, Text, Time, Financial, Color, and Hardware tools. Built as a full-stack TypeScript application with a privacy-first design, it offers a modern, responsive UI with dark/light theme support, optimized for desktop, mobile, and TV displays. Key advantages include: Open Source & Community-Driven, Browser-Based Computation for Enhanced Security, Zero Data Transmission, and Offline Functionality. All current tools are free to use since computation happens entirely in your browser, providing both security and performance benefits.

## Tenets

### Privacy First

- **Zero Data Transmission**: All operations happen locally in your browser - no data ever leaves your device
- **Air-Gapped Compatible**: Designed to work in completely isolated environments
- **Enterprise Ready**: Designed to be safe for handling sensitive company data and proprietary information

Read more on our [Security](./SECURITY.md).

### Developer Focused

- **By Developers, For Developers**: Built to solve real problems we face daily
- **Keyboard-First UX**: Every tool accessible via keyboard shortcuts for maximum productivity
- **Offline Always**: Works without internet - no external dependencies or CDN calls

### Open & Accessible

- **100% Open Source**: Community-driven development with transparent codebase
- **Completely Free**: All current tools are free to use since computation happens in your browser
- **Universal Access**: Works on desktop, mobile, and TV displays with responsive design

## User Preferences

Preferred communication style: Simple, everyday language.
Preferred UI behavior: All menu sections collapsed by default, with minimize buttons (< and ^) for maximum screen real estate optimization suitable for TV displays. Sidebar should be collapsed by default.
Preferred terminology: "Camera" instead of "Webcam" for video capture devices.

## Recent Updates (August 16, 2025)

- **CI-Dependent Releases**: Release workflow now requires CI to pass before allowing releases, with emergency bypass option
- **Make Target Integration**: Updated all build scripts and release automation to use make targets instead of npm commands
- **Release Automation**: Comprehensive GitHub Actions workflows with automated building, packaging, and changelog generation
- **Search Testing**: Added end-to-end tests for search functionality including text tool discovery and keyboard navigation
- **Enhanced Mobile UX**: Improved hamburger menu with larger touch targets, better accessibility, and enhanced sidebar layout
- **Centralized Architecture**: Created unified data source for all components (sidebar, homepage, search, demo) to eliminate inconsistencies
- **Navigation Fixes**: Resolved double "/tools" path issues and demo system routing for seamless user experience
- **UI Optimization**: Sidebar defaults to collapsed state for maximum screen real estate, especially for TV displays
- **Keyboard Shortcuts**: Updated Ctrl+J for JSON Formatter, moved JSON↔YAML to Ctrl+Shift+Y
- **Code Quality**: Simplified HTML validation logic, fixed barcode centering, improved TypeScript error handling
- **Documentation**: Renamed replit.md to README.md with comprehensive tenets section

## System Architecture

### Frontend Architecture

The client-side is a React with TypeScript application, built on a component-based architecture. It utilizes shadcn/ui components (based on Radix UI) and Tailwind CSS for styling, supporting light and dark modes via CSS variables.

- **Routing**: Uses wouter for lightweight client-side routing.
- **State Management**: Leverages React's built-in state management with hooks.
- **UI/UX Decisions**: Features collapsible header/sidebar menus with state persistence, responsive sidebar modes, a unified text editor with line numbers, and a searchable tool directory with keyboard shortcut navigation. All 49 tools now use simple React state (no session persistence) for optimal reliability and performance, and UI uniformity is achieved through shared components like `ToolButton` and `ToolTextArea`. Regex Tester uses Ctrl+E shortcut (Ctrl+R reserved for browser refresh). Session management has been completely removed from all tools for enhanced stability.

### Backend Architecture

There is no back-end, this is entirely a stand-alone, and self sufficient front-end application

### Data Storage Solutions

The application currently uses an in-memory storage implementation but is architected for future PostgreSQL integration via Drizzle ORM for type-safe database interactions.

### Authentication and Authorization

Not implemented

### Technical Implementations & Feature Specifications

- **Tool Suite**: Comprehensive conversion tools (URL/CSV to JSON, Number Base, Date, Timezone, Unit), advanced text tools (password generator, UUID v1/v4), and hardware tests (Camera, Microphone, Keyboard) with Web Audio API integration for alerts. Added Metronome with multi-tone functionality. All 48 tools converted to simple React state management for enhanced reliability.
- **Demo System**: Automated tour functionality with customizable speed controls (Slow 8s, Normal 5s, Fast 3s, Very Fast 1.5s), persistent state management, skip/stop controls, and speed preference persistence via localStorage.
- **Offline Functionality**: All external dependencies for tools like QR and Barcode generators have been replaced with local JavaScript libraries to ensure 100% offline functionality.
- **URL Sharing**: Implemented across all major tools, including timing tools, for state persistence and sharing.
- **Monetization**: Includes a 3-ad placement system for revenue generation.
- **Security**: Implemented Content Security Policy and removed external dependencies enforcing a privacy-first, zero-network-dependency architecture suitable for air-gapped environments. Strict validation and sanitization are applied to all URL parameters.

## Quick Start

### Run Locally With Docker

[Install docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/), pick a [release](https://github.com/spring1843/FreeDevTool.App/releases) tag e.g. v0.0.2, replace it with the variable in the following command and run it.

```bash
docker run -it -p 9090:9090 ghcr.io/spring1843/freedevtool.app/app:{RELEASE_TAG}
```

Then browse [https://localhost:9090](https://localhost:9090).

### Development Setup

```bash
make setup    # Install dependencies and setup development environment
make start    # Start the development server
```

### Available Commands

```bash
make help     # Show all available commands
make deps     # Install dependencies
make build-static    # Build for production
make test     # Run tests
make lint     # Check code quality
make format   # Format code
```

### Testing

```bash
make test          # Run unit tests
make e2e-test      # Run end-to-end tests
make test-coverage # Run tests with coverage
```

### Release Process

- **Automatic**: Push a git tag (e.g., `v1.0.0`) to trigger a release
- **Manual**: Use GitHub Actions workflow dispatch with version input
- **CI Requirement**: All releases require CI to pass first
- **Emergency Bypass**: Manual releases can bypass CI if needed (creates prerelease with warning)

## External Dependencies

### Core Framework Dependencies

- **React 18**: Frontend framework.
- **Express.js**: Backend web framework.
- **TypeScript**: Type safety across the stack.
- **Vite**: Build tool and development server.

### UI and Styling

- **Tailwind CSS**: Utility-first CSS framework.
- **Radix UI**: Headless UI components.
- **shadcn/ui**: Component library based on Radix UI.
- **Lucide React**: Icon library.

### Database and ORM

- **Drizzle ORM**: Type-safe SQL ORM for PostgreSQL.
- **@neondatabase/serverless**: PostgreSQL driver.
- **Drizzle Kit**: CLI for database migrations.

### Development and Build Tools

- **ESBuild**: Fast JavaScript bundler.
- **Prettier**: Code formatter.
- **wouter**: Lightweight React router alternative.

### Utility Libraries

- **js-yaml**: YAML parsing and stringification.
- **date-fns**: Date manipulation and formatting.
- **clsx/tailwind-merge**: Conditional CSS class composition.
- **nanoid**: Unique ID generation.
- **connect-pg-simple**: PostgreSQL session storage.

## License

Licensed under the Apache License 2.0 - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for full details.

```
Copyright 2025 FreeDevTool.App

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
```

Commit message:

Cleanup README by removing outdated sections
Removed recent updates section and database details from README.

README.md, after:

# FreeDevTool.app

[FreeDevTool.App](https://FreeDevTool.App)

**A comprehensive collection of 49+ open source developer tools with offline functionality**

## Overview

FreeDevTool.App is a comprehensive web-based collection of open source developer and productivity utilities. It provides a wide range of tools across sections like Conversions, Formatters, Encoders, Text, Time, Financial, Color, and Hardware tools. Built as a full-stack TypeScript application with a privacy-first design, it offers a modern, responsive UI with dark/light theme support, optimized for desktop, mobile, and TV displays. Key advantages include: Open Source & Community-Driven, Browser-Based Computation for Enhanced Security, Zero Data Transmission, and Offline Functionality. All current tools are free to use since computation happens entirely in your browser, providing both security and performance benefits.

## Tenets

### Privacy First

- **Zero Data Transmission**: All operations happen locally in your browser - no data ever leaves your device
- **Air-Gapped Compatible**: Designed to work in completely isolated environments
- **Enterprise Ready**: Designed to be safe for handling sensitive company data and proprietary information

Read more on our [Security](./SECURITY.md).

### Developer Focused

- **By Developers, For Developers**: Built to solve real problems we face daily
- **Keyboard-First UX**: Every tool accessible via keyboard shortcuts for maximum productivity
- **Offline Always**: Works without internet - no external dependencies or CDN calls

### Open & Accessible

- **100% Open Source**: Community-driven development with transparent codebase
- **Completely Free**: All current tools are free to use since computation happens in your browser
- **Universal Access**: Works on desktop, mobile, and TV displays with responsive design

## User Preferences

Preferred communication style: Simple, everyday language.
Preferred UI behavior: All menu sections collapsed by default, with minimize buttons (< and ^) for maximum screen real estate optimization suitable for TV displays. Sidebar should be collapsed by default.
Preferred terminology: "Camera" instead of "Webcam" for video capture devices.

## System Architecture

### Frontend Architecture

The client-side is a React with TypeScript application, built on a component-based architecture. It utilizes shadcn/ui components (based on Radix UI) and Tailwind CSS for styling, supporting light and dark modes via CSS variables.

- **Routing**: Uses wouter for lightweight client-side routing.
- **State Management**: Leverages React's built-in state management with hooks.
- **UI/UX Decisions**: Features collapsible header/sidebar menus with state persistence, responsive sidebar modes, a unified text editor with line numbers, and a searchable tool directory with keyboard shortcut navigation. All 49 tools now use simple React state (no session persistence) for optimal reliability and performance, and UI uniformity is achieved through shared components like `ToolButton` and `ToolTextArea`. Regex Tester uses Ctrl+E shortcut (Ctrl+R reserved for browser refresh). Session management has been completely removed from all tools for enhanced stability.

### Backend Architecture

There is no back-end, this is entirely a stand-alone, and self sufficient front-end application that can be served using a webserver like Nginx.

### Data Storage Solutions

The application currently uses an in-memory storage implementation but is architected for future PostgreSQL integration via Drizzle ORM for type-safe database interactions.

### Authentication and Authorization

Not implemented

### Technical Implementations & Feature Specifications

- **Tool Suite**: Comprehensive conversion tools (URL/CSV to JSON, Number Base, Date, Timezone, Unit), advanced text tools (password generator, UUID v1/v4), and hardware tests (Camera, Microphone, Keyboard) with Web Audio API integration for alerts. Added Metronome with multi-tone functionality. All 48 tools converted to simple React state management for enhanced reliability.
- **Demo System**: Automated tour functionality with customizable speed controls (Slow 8s, Normal 5s, Fast 3s, Very Fast 1.5s), persistent state management, skip/stop controls, and speed preference persistence via localStorage.
- **Offline Functionality**: All external dependencies for tools like QR and Barcode generators have been replaced with local JavaScript libraries to ensure 100% offline functionality.
- **URL Sharing**: Implemented across all major tools, including timing tools, for state persistence and sharing.
- **Monetization**: Includes a 3-ad placement system for revenue generation.
- **Security**: Implemented Content Security Policy and removed external dependencies enforcing a privacy-first, zero-network-dependency architecture suitable for air-gapped environments. Strict validation and sanitization are applied to all URL parameters.

## Quick Start

### Run Locally With Docker

[Install docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/), pick a [release](https://github.com/spring1843/FreeDevTool.App/releases) tag e.g. v0.0.2, replace it with the variable in the following command and run it.

```bash
docker run -it -p 9090:9090 ghcr.io/spring1843/freedevtool.app/app:{RELEASE_TAG}
```

Then browse [https://localhost:9090](https://localhost:9090).

### Development Setup

```bash
make setup    # Install dependencies and setup development environment
make start    # Start the development server
```

### Available Commands

```bash
make help     # Show all available commands
make deps     # Install dependencies
make build-static    # Build for production
make test     # Run tests
make lint     # Check code quality
make format   # Format code
```

### Testing

```bash
make test          # Run unit tests
make e2e-test      # Run end-to-end tests
make test-coverage # Run tests with coverage
```

### Release Process

- **Automatic**: Push a git tag (e.g., `v1.0.0`) to trigger a release
- **Manual**: Use GitHub Actions workflow dispatch with version input
- **CI Requirement**: All releases require CI to pass first
- **Emergency Bypass**: Manual releases can bypass CI if needed (creates prerelease with warning)

## External Dependencies

### Core Framework Dependencies

- **React 18**: Frontend framework.
- **Express.js**: Backend web framework.
- **TypeScript**: Type safety across the stack.
- **Vite**: Build tool and development server.

### UI and Styling

- **Tailwind CSS**: Utility-first CSS framework.
- **Radix UI**: Headless UI components.
- **shadcn/ui**: Component library based on Radix UI.
- **Lucide React**: Icon library.

### Development and Build Tools

- **ESBuild**: Fast JavaScript bundler.
- **Prettier**: Code formatter.
- **wouter**: Lightweight React router alternative.

### Utility Libraries

- **js-yaml**: YAML parsing and stringification.
- **date-fns**: Date manipulation and formatting.
- **clsx/tailwind-merge**: Conditional CSS class composition.
- **nanoid**: Unique ID generation.
- **connect-pg-simple**: PostgreSQL session storage.

## License

Licensed under the Apache License 2.0 - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for full details.

```
Copyright 2025 FreeDevTool.App

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
```
